Do not memorise the words first. Watch how each one behaves. On the board we have a wooden block, a cup of water, and a balloon full of air. No labels yet. If we name the words too early, the words can hide the evidence. Today the evidence comes first. What keeps its own shape? What changes shape? What spreads through the space it gets?
Start with the block. Move it from a tray to a box. The block still has its own shape. It can be turned, lifted, stacked, and moved, but it does not pour into the corner of the box. That is the main solid clue. A solid usually keeps its own shape. Some solids are soft or bendy, but they still do not flow like water.
Now watch the water. Pour it from a narrow cup into a wide bowl. The amount is meant to stay the same, but the shape changes. The water takes the shape of the container. That is the liquid clue. A liquid can flow. It does not keep one fixed shape, but it still takes up space. If the cup is full, you cannot also put the same space full of juice there.
Now air. We are not using particle dots yet, because the model-warning chapter comes next. For now, use macroscopic evidence. The balloon grows because air takes up space. A plunger pushes against a shaded air region because the air is there and can push back. Invisible does not mean nothing. Arrows show where the invisible gas goes; they are not particles and not decoration.
A student might say, but jelly is wobbly, so is it a liquid? Good interruption. Jelly is a tricky soft solid for our purposes. One clue is not enough. It wobbles, but it does not pour like water into a new container. That is why the board has a tricky lane. In science, tricky examples are not annoying. They are useful because they make us test our words.
Now we can name the states. Solid: usually keeps its own shape. Liquid: flows and takes the container shape. Gas: spreads through the available space. Notice how late the labels arrived. That is deliberate. The words are not magic badges. They are names for behaviour we already watched.
One more precision move. People often call the cloudy stuff above hot water steam. Visible mist is actually tiny liquid water droplets floating in air. Water vapour itself is invisible gas. The arrows on this board show where invisible water vapour goes. The little mist marks are liquid droplets. Hot water examples are app-only or adult-only; you do not handle steam in a child task.
Let us sort examples. Ice cube: solid. Juice: liquid. Air in a tyre: gas. Honey: liquid, but slow. Sponge: tricky solid with air pockets. That last one matters. A sponge can hold air and water, but the sponge material itself is still a solid. Sorting is not about one quick look. It is about behaviour and evidence.
The chapter test will ask about shape, flow, space, and tricky cases. If your brain says gas is nothing, remember the balloon and the plunger. If your brain says wobbly means liquid, remember the jelly and sponge. We classify by evidence, not by the first word that feels right.
Let us add a careful practice round. I will show a jar of honey. It pours, but slowly. That still makes it behave like a liquid in this lesson. Slow flow is still flow. Now I show a sponge. The sponge can hold air and water, but the sponge material is a solid with holes. That is why it belongs in the tricky solid lane.
Repair a weak answer. A learner says, gas is not matter because I cannot see it. The better answer is: I cannot see the air, but the balloon gets bigger and the plunger pushes back, so there is evidence that air takes up space. That is the move we want: not see, therefore nothing is weak. Evidence, therefore matter is stronger.
Here is another sort. Sand keeps a pile shape, so solid. Milk pours and takes the cup shape, so liquid. Air in a football spreads through the inside space, so gas. Foam is tricky, because it has gas bubbles inside liquid or solid material. Tricky does not mean impossible. It means slow down and ask what part you are classifying.
Before the test, keep three questions ready. Does it keep its own shape? Does it flow and take the container shape? Does it spread through the available space? Those three questions are better than asking whether it looks hard, wet, or invisible.
Final training pause before the test. Do not rush this last board. For Solid, Liquid or Gas?, say the main idea in your own words, then test it against one new example. If the example changes the job, the material, the state, the heat direction, or the evidence, update the answer instead of memorising the last picture. That is why this is training, not just a video. The test checks whether the idea transfers.